you know I literally went into Oxford andsaid
listen the economy is collapsing I knowwhy
I've made millions of pounds doing it
I was one of the best economists in
best traders in the whole world, one of
the biggest banks in the whole world
I don't want it to happen, can we stop it?
and they were completely not interested
okay I wanted to do a video called
the World of Economics which basically
explains to you exactly what economics is, the
different spaces, the different people in the world
of economics, how it takes shape, um I wanted
to understand, I wanted to explain it because
basically this affects policy, affects government,
it affects the way the economy is managed,
it massively affects your life, especially withregards
to things like; the economic managementor
mismanagement of Covid & 2008 (GFC) & yet I think
ordinary people generally don't have good awareness
of how that world works why the different
people are in the different spaces and also
who you see and who you don't see and what's
happening on your TV and what's happening
behind the screen so today we're going to explain
the world of economics. I'm going to take you back
to university because this is basically where the
World of Economics begins and where most economics
professionals and most economic students start
their life right, so I studied at London Schoolof
Economics (LSE) and most powerful economists and
people who end up in powerful roles in government,
in central banking, in media, in finance willgo
to one of these 'elite economics institutions'
so in this country the UK we have quite a lot
of elite universities we've got the London
School of Economics, we've got Oxford, we've
got Cambridge, we've got other universities
like Warwick and Imperial and Durham and UCL
a lotof prestigious universities which will produce
professional economists who can go and
work in professional economic spaces
um there are a lot of very powerful universities
in the US such as Harvard and Yale and Princeton
and MIT and Chicago is quite influentialin
economics and there's there's one big one
called Bacconi in Italy and another big one in
Paris and the point I want to get through toyou
here is most powerful economists come through
a pretty small number of elite universities
they tend to come from richer families
because economics itself is the least
economically diverse subject of any in a major
university which means that economic students
tend to come from richer families, there's
very few that tend to come from poor families
now say you get into one of these top universities,
when you're actually in the university I think
it's interesting I think most people
will be interested to understand that
the vast majority of what you do on an
economics degree is basically memorising
and regurgitating Algebra, I think people would be
really surprised to know that we don't talk about
why housing has become unaffordable or why
increasingly it's difficult to get well-paid jobs
or difficult to securely have a family, these are
things which in elite universities you knowand
I studied 3 years at London School of Economics
& more recently did a 2 year Masters at Oxford,
at elite universities we don't discuss things like
the cost of living crisis or house price crisis
or increased poverty; these things are, if you're
lucky you might be able to take them in the sort
of optional module which nobody who's serious
about becoming an economist would take, what we
generally do is algebra, algebra, algebra, lots and
lots of algebra and um economists tend to be very
good at algebra because that's what they've done
they memorize a lot of algebra for complicated
models and they repeat the algebra in the exam
that's basically the training of an economies
the next important step in the World of
Economics is what happens when you finish
your undergrad degree, now at this
point the World of Economics which
up until your 21-22, has lived in the
universities, it starts to split in essence,
a huge number of economics graduates from these
top universities go into Finance and these guys
who go into Finance you will never hear them, you
never see them, they're not going to be on your TV,
very few of them will never work for
government, for civil service, for the media
these guys can make a lot of money they can make a
million pounds a year, two million pounds a year if
they're very successful they can make £10 million
a year these guys can make a lot of money but
you will never hear them, these guys they disappear
fromthe public world once they go into Finance
other people go into public facing jobs and
these are the economists that you see so
these are the economists that might write
for the guardian or might work in media or
might work for the central bank and become
chief economist of the central bank or
head of central bank monetary policy committee or
they might end up going into academia and becoming
prestigious academic economists, basically at this
point, normally the end of the undergrad sometimes
the end of the post grad, there's a split in
economists between those that basically go
out into finance to try to make money and those
that stay in some public facing role; academia,
think tanks is another place that people can go
butthere's a split at this point; those who go in
to the money world & those who go into the public
facing world and it's important to understand
there's an enormous difference
in expected financial outcomes
in this world right so if you stay, if you
want to become a public-facing economist
you are probably gonna have to do a master'sdegree,
you might well have to do a PhD, so you're goingto be
staying at University for at least another
four years it could be five six seven years
um and you will be probably paying to study
if you're lucky you might get a scholarship
which means that you you know basically
enough to sort of live off but you're
probably going to have five six seven years
of of of poverty at least in terms of your
income from your work or you might even be paying
to work whereas if you go into finance you know I
was literally a multi-millionaire at 25. so
there's a massive massive difference in the
expected financial outcomes of depending on which
direction that you go in um and for this reason
for most people going into finance is a much more
attractive option because it's just unbelievably
better paid than going into public facing
economics, which sort of raises a question
of who goes into public facing economics?
um and I think you either have to be rich
or a bit crazy really because you know I come
from a poor background right and um I made a lot
of money in the city and that is the money which
I used to fund this Channel and that is the money
which I used to buy the place that I live in and
then my brother needed to buy a place I helped him
buy a place and now my sister needs to buy a place
I'm helping her buy a place so basically this is
the money which provides complete financial
security for me, my family, my kids if I ever
have kids um and if I had gone into Academia, I
wouldn't have a property, my brother wouldn't have
a property, my sister wouldn't have a property and
probably I would never be able to comfortably have
a family so that it's a massive massive financial
sacrifice you make to go into public facing
economics and whilst there are some people who
believe in it so much they will do that the vast
majority of people who are able to do that are
people who are from richer backgrounds because
they can afford to take that financial hit, their
parents can support them throughout their studies
um it's important to realise even after you
graduate in that public sector space you're
probably not going to make a lot of money for
the first few years of your career working
as an economist in the media, in academia, in in the
world of think tanks, the world of government, civil
service, so that's the first thing to understand is
that we there's basically 2 worlds of economics
a world that is very well paid which you never
see and a world which is pretty badly paid but
you do see and these guys are the guys whose job
is to protect you basically the guys who and you
kind of need to ask yourself okay well what
kind of people are you probably gonna get and
of course you know there are good people who
go into academia, who can go into think tanks,
go into civil service, go into government and
I know a lot of them so it's still possible that
we get good people in this in this world of
of public facing economics but then I think
then we need to start talking about the
second question which is the differences
in incentivization and motivation structures for
the people in the two different worlds right so
the best paid 10,000 economists in the world
are probably all traders, that's the first thing
that you probably should know right I think that's
quite interesting right because you probably don't
know personally any traders you know there are
a couple who have a public profile like it's me
and there's like a couple others I don't remember
their names but um the vast majority of traders
you'll never hear from, so the economists thatyou
see for example is it Evan Davis the guy onBBC
you know Andy Verity I'm not sure but whatever
the guys you know Larry Elliott at the guardian or
Huw Pill chief economists of the Bank ofEngland
or um Andrew Bailey head of the Bank ofEngland
or Janet Yelen who used to be head of the Fed,
all of these people, these economists have all
are basically do not have, are not the best paid
economists, so what I think it's quite interesting is
a little bit like when we watch the news, when
we interact with the public facing economics
we think we're looking at the best economists
but it's a little bit like we're watching like
division 3 football (I love division 3football
because Leyton Orient just won the league) but
and we think we're watching the Premier League
but in reality the Premier League is happening
in some skyscraper that you never see so
I think the first thing is to realise that
all of the best paid economists are not in the
public's sphere right and those guys, the traders
they are very very, well I think maybe that's
changed a little bit since I was there but
in general when they're very well incentivised
to make predictions that are right, it's a very
it's not an immoral world, it's more of an
amoral world right, your job is just to be right
just be right, just be right, you know so wheni was
there, are things gonna be good or are things
gonna be bad? 'I think things are gonna be bad'
oh you'reright, here's your money & it's also very
there's a very transparent analysis structure, so people
can see who's the best economist at Citibank so
when I was a Citibanks top economist, you know
there was a spreadsheet that went out to all the
traders on the floor and they could see oh
thisyear, Gary's the best Citibank traderor
economist, in terms of his predictions were the
best predictions right so very a-moral and not
immoral but just, very objective very transparent
in incentive structure, for those traders, try and
be right, try and be right, try and be right,
everybody can see who's right & who's wrong
now let's consider the traders in the publicsphere,
the sorry the economists in the public sphere
see i'm always reminded of this one professori had
at Oxford who wrote a paper and then he lectured
us on the paper saying that if the Eurozone
had not done quantitative easing then their
GDP would have been something like 3.7% lower he
made a really specific prediction about how much
lower GDP would be if they hadn't donethat
and that was interesting for me because
it's very rare that economists make very clear
specific predictions (economists in academia)
so what because in my experience economists in
academia very rarely just try and think about
try and like really specifically be right about
something so I put my hand up because I was
interested and I said to him "do you think that's
right?" and he said to me "what do you mean?"
and i was like, you know, would you, you know
"did you write this paper?" he was like "yes" and
I was like "you know do you think that's right?" &
he said to me "I don't, I don't know what you mean!"
I said "do you think its right, that if the ECBdidn't do
QE, then Eurozone GP would be 3.7% lower?" and
he just said "I just I don't know what you mean!" and
i thought that was so interesting but super telling
about what most (there are of course some good
people in academia) what most academic economists
are doing in their career which is, what they get
rewarded for, what they get paid for, what they get
promoted for; is writing very mathematically
flamboyant mathematically elegant papers
they don't have time to think about what actually
wouldhave happened, what's going to happen,
what's really happening because that's not what they
getpaid to do, that's not what they get incentivised
to do, that's not what they get rewarded to do and
if you were to actually do that as an economist
it would seriously jeopardize your career because
it's being an academic economist is not easy it's
not easy and I think I want to link this back to
what it's like being an economic student which is
economic students I've mentioned they spend all
their time doing algebra and you might be thinking
well why don't the economic students argue against
that? why don't they criticise? well but the fact is
being an economic student at an elite
University is ****ing hard, like they have
a lot of algebra to memorise, seriously
a lot and when you go to these exams
if you haven't memorised the algebra,
you'regoing to fail the exam right so these
guys are busy and they're working damn hard
to memorise the algebra they don't really
have time to question what's happening if they
want to get a good degree and to get a good job
and it's the same for the professors being
an economics professor is not easy, you have
to write really complicated papers and if you
don't write those papers you're not going to
get promoted, we've already discussed that it's
not a very lucrative job it's very competitive
it's a struggle to make ends meet unless you're
from a rich background right so these professors
they are not paid to try and understand stuff and
I think that the traders who are paid to be right
it's very difficult to be right about the real
world without some understanding but to write
a very elegant mathematical paper that is you
don't really need to know anything about the
real economy so these academics primarily
are just trying to write fancy papers
now that brings us to the next world of
public economics which is the media now
I've been floating around the economics media
now for a couple of years and um I'm not going to
name any names but it is one of the most comedic
spaces I have existed in my entire life and I can
guarantee you with absolute certainty that the
vast majority of people in the economics media
have never even asked themselves the question
of "should I try and be right?" their job is to
write professional looking articles and to
produce professional looking media content
especially if you're considering the news and
the radio these guys run 24 7 content right and
they need people to come on, and they don't
know who the best people are, they're calling
around, they call me up "hey can you
comeand talk about this" and I'll be like
"I don't really know about that" & they'llbe
like "yeah it'll be fine" you know theseguys
they just want to produce professionallooking
media content, and I don't think there is
any more comedic space within economics and
economics media and that is again because
nobody, if you write an article, you know I've
mentioned it many times, I predicted at the
beginning of Covid we would have a
cost of living crisis at the end of Covid
nobody goes back and checks right you know
ifsomebody's written that in the guardian you
know, well I did write in the guardian, nobody
goes oh let's get that guy back who was right
3 years ago right, you know nobody goes back,
media is the classic example of economics where
nobody checks their homework but what you
are judged on is a looking professionaland
sounding professional, and economists
in general, will act according to their
incentives, so economics and academia are trying
to write fancy papers, economics in the media are
trying to present professional looking content
but none of them really care about being right
economics in the central bank well I mean in the
central bank I think they they are slightly more
tied to reality but as you can see the central
bank has done a phenomenally poor job of managing
inflation in the last few years and they've done a
phenomenally poor job of managing the economy
in the last 20 years, you know does anybodyget
fired? does anybody get fined? you know and
I would like to talk to more people in Central
Banking because I think here is a space where
people could be more open-minded but I think
the problem you have is the vast majority of
senior economists at central banks are basically
academics and they've been steeped in this world
of just learn and repeat, just memorise and I
think again you have a problem of basically
there is not seriously any reward for
being right and I think the end result is
in the whole of, oh of course we should mention the
last World of Economics which is government and
um you know I'm not going to mention any
namesbut I talk to politicians and I tell them
"if you don't fix inequality, the economy will
collapse and living standards will collapse"
and they turn around and they say to me
"yeah but we don't think it's a vote winner"
& that tells you the incentivisations ofgovernment
right these guys need to win elections and
and most of what they spend their timedoing
is thinking "how do we win elections?" so i think
what you have in the World of Economics is quite
interesting right you have one group of people
who you will never see who get paid a ton of money
specifically to be right and people who are right
get aggressively promoted and aggressively
rewarded and people are wrong get fired and
they are in no way given any responsibility to
manage your economy and then in the world of
public economics you have a load of people who
are doing like weird different kinds of dances
essentially you have academics, who are trying to
write fancy papers, media people who are trying to
produce professional looking media, government
people who are trying to win elections and you
know people who think tanks who are generally
just trying to push whatever political view
they want, but nobody is rewarded for being right
so nobody is trying to be right, I think the end
result is what you've what you have is really the
kind of the complete intellectual death of public
economics as a result of these two things which is
number one aggressively sucking or aggressively
incentivising through money all of the best people
to not work in the public sector and then creating
incentive structure in the public sector such
that you are heavily incentivised not to actually
try to be right and that brings us to the next
thing which is how can we fix this okay so
in a sense what you have with this division is
a natural manifestation of wealth inequality
in society which is the very rich can pay
people like me a lot of money to work for them
whereas governments are increasingly bankrupt
media doesn't really care about how good you are
and only cares about what you look like so
this public sphere is never going to pay enough
to compete with finance but there are still
people within economics who care enough about
preventing the collapse of our society that they
would work for government in the public sector
even for no money you know I would be willing
to support government in preventing economic
collapse even for free I do this YouTube channel
for free because I don't want society to collapse
but because we have no structures of identifying
and rewarding good people in public economics it
becomes impossible for people like me to actually
get senior jobs in public economics and I think
it's so interesting that I could go and walk in
the skyscraper and get paid two million pounds
a year to bet on the collapse of our society but
if I went to try to speak to you know I literally
went into Oxford and said listen the economy
is collapsing I know why I've been millions of
pounds doing it I was one of the best economists
in best traders in the whole world one of the
biggest banks in the whole world I don't want it
to happen can we stop it and they were completely
not interested and you know I've been out here you
know I know people in government must have seen
these videos saying let's stop the... but they're
not interested, I think what we need to do is we
need to start checking the homework of economists
in the public sector we need to start saying okay
make predictions and let's find out who is able
to correctly predict what is happening because
economics is not a physical science we can't do
experiments so it becomes very difficult to know
with certainty who was right and who was wrong
because we can't go back so for example I said
at the beginning of Covid we are going to see a
massive cost of living crisis at the end of Covid
and that happened but now people turn around and
say oh but you just got lucky because it happened
it was because of the war in Ukraine and that's
the reason why it happened then you actually got
lucky right um and you know my history is you know
I've been lucky for a ****ing long time right you
know I've retired at age 26 because I have a very
long track record of making correct predictions
right but in the public sector and in finance that
is enough to you know put Gary in the front line let
him manage the money let him make the decisions
because he has a track record of being right but
in the public sector there is no way essentially
for somebody like me who has a long track record
of being right to criticize or challenge the
people in power even if they have a long track
record of being wrong and if that's what you
create as your system of managing the economy
is inevitable that your economy
will collapse basically because
you will end up with with idiots running
the economy and there will be no way for
even well-meaning people who are willing to do
it for free and who understand to challenge them
so I think we need to start forcing
public sector economies to make
predictions of the future, I think that if we do
this this will happen, if we do that that will
happen, so that we can start taking the microphone
away from these posh boys who are always wrong
and giving a bit of power to people who actually
understand what's happening because otherwise
of course they're all going to go work in the
skyscrapers for two million pounds a year why
are you going to work for government if they're
not even going to listen to you if you're right so
that is to conclude the world of Economics it
is honestly it's an absolutely comedic situation
it's an absolutely comedic situation with all of
the best guys locked away in the skyscraper and
you know I've worked I've been at two of the top
universities in the world for economics I've been
on the trading floor I've worked in the media I've
been in think tanks the quantity of discussion
on the trading floor is I don't want to give the
impressionable Traders as Union since they're not
but the quality of discussion trading for is so
much better because people are trying to be right
and at the moment all of the people who are taking
your tax money to run the economy are not trying
to be right & um that is why they keepgetting
it wrong so we need to fix it weneed to
hold economists to account we need to have
actually intelligent people running the economy
and i know we don't so um let's change
it share this video around let people
know the system is broken but it can be
fixed if we just put good people in charge
let's change it thank you!
*acouple of questions if you dont mind*
*um so you used to mention about checking their
homework, yeah is it really like no one who's work*
*you check and they at least get a a little bit
right or* I think there's a silver there's a super
when I challenge economists about you guys have
are always wrong consistently consistently wrong
what they say to me is oh but it's impossible to
be right it's and it's how funny is that some posh
boy who's basically barely left his mother's womb
right just been like silver spoon fed through his
whole career being wrong his whole career talking
to me right ****ing expelled from school ****ing
multi-millionaire at 25 because he keeps being
right predicting the economic economic crisis and
he just turns around and says the reason we're
always wrong is because it's impossible to be right
and there's there's this kind of there's this
self-protecting like nihilism that has like
dripped into their consciousness which is yeah we
know we're always wrong but we're still the best
and you know it's a little bit like you go
to watch your local pub team and they're all
like yeah we lose every game but we're the
best because it's impossible to win games
you know it's impossible and every day the
traders are getting like way right yeah but it's
you know that's what that was what will happen if
you you know if you bankrupt your public sphere
and you pay all of the best people to work for the
rich you know you know imagine imagine building
a football team with no funding and expecting to
beat ****ing man city and then when you continually
lose say it's impossible to be good at football
thats what all these economies say and its such
a comedy, it's a comical farce what is happening
in the world of Economics, um but you see the
consequences it's ****ing horrible you know what
I mean and it's it's yeah it's it's truly amazing
I think what we're witnessing is so amazing
so amazing and it's uh this like complicated
it's like a complicated mixture
of corruption greed and idiocy